# TALKER Expanded
A fork of [TALKER](https://github.com/danclave/TALKER). See the main repo for full installation instructions and setup guide.

This is my personal experiment attempting to get more immersion and roleplaying out of the already amazing TALKER mod.

I am an absolute hack, and all credit for this amazing mod goes to the creators and maintainers of the main repo. Credit to [this](https://github.com/danclave/TALKER/issues/39) and the discussion in that thread for setting me down on the road to fiddling with the prompt. I still use many of the ideas from that discussion in my current prompt. Credit to [issue#40](https://github.com/danclave/TALKER/issues/40) of the main repo for the basic code for reloading personalities on existing save games. Credit also to that same user again ([CanineHatTrickOnNose](https://github.com/CanineHatTrickOnNose)) for doing the initial revision of faction personalities and unique character personalities. I initially used his files from Discord with base TALKER, and looking at those files and making changes was how I started this mod. Some of his characterisations are still in the files wholesale alongside my additions as they fit the character well.

## CHANGES FROM MAIN BUILD
*   **Long-Term Memory:** TALKER Expanded uses a three-tier hierarchical memory system. Each character now has a persistent, working long-term memory recording past events. The "compress memory" function from base TALKER has been improved into a summarizing "mid-term memory", working as a bridge between current events and long-term memory, extending dialogue context windows. Every time compression is triggered, the old "mid-term memory" gets evaluated by the non-dialogue LLM model to see what new information should be added to long-term memories.

*   **Backstories:** This is a new part of character identity that supplements the already existing personality, giving the LLM more information about characterization and making every NPC more unique and different from the next. Unique characters have unique backstories based on lore and information about the character in the game, from previous games and/or on the wiki. Each non-unique NPC is given a random backstory from a list of over 100+ depending on the faction. The backstories are still in a process of revision, but the goal is for every faction to have their own unique flavour and have random NPCs with backstories that make sense for their faction identity.

*   **Expanded random NPC character personality:** I have tried to revise the personality trait list, making sure the personality traits are interesting and lead to good output. I have also expanded the list from the default 63 to over 200, hopefully providing some more variety. Finally, the script now assigns *two* random personality traits to every NPC instead of one. I have found two personality traits to be the ideal number, as they can play off each other and combine into a distinct characterization without confusing the LLM. This - combined with a random backstory - will hopefully make every random NPC feel unique and distinctive.

*   **Better prompting and immersion:** The prompt sent to the AI in TALKER is very basic, and the LLM is given very little information to work with both in general, in relation to the speaking character and in relation to the surrounding world. I have played around with expanding and revising the general prompt, as well as made changes to the dynamic prompt generator and the information stored in memory for every event. The general rules in config.lua are much more extensive now, with a focus on trying to make the output lifelike and make the NPCs talk like independent human beings. It also has guidelines for ranks and what they mean, and the dynamic part of the prompt now provides more faction and rank context. Unlike base TALKER, NPCs now know which faction they belong to and which factions you and others around them belong to. NPCs will act according to their rank, and will treat you differently depending on your rank. You will be called a "rookie" if you are one for example, and treated with less respect. NPCs that are your companions should know that they are companions, and behave a little more friendly towards you. NPCs with fixed roles like mechanics and bartenders are fed this information in the prompt so they can act naturally according to their role, offering you a drink or talking about repairs.

*  **New Dialogue Triggers:** Completing tasks, sleeping and getting critically injured may now trigger dialogue events. Task and Sleep triggers are companion-aware: if you have companions they will know they also slept/comleted the task as a group.

*  **Script fixes:** Idle Conversation and Artifact script now both work. Callout script has multiple anti-spam functions to ensure only valid new spotting events gets called out. Anomalies script filters out radioactive fields and radiation anomalies, preventing the behaviour in base TALKER of NPCs constantly talking about how irradiated you are and making jokes about you "glowing in the dark".

*  **Bug fixes:** Fixed several nil value errors, fixed several bugs related to the pick_speaker function.


## EXISTING SAVES/RELOADING PERSONALITIES AND BACKGROUNDS
If you have an ongoing save, or you want to reset randomly generated personalities or backstories you can go to TALKER\bin\lua\domain\repo and in personalites.lua/backstories.lua you can change RESET_PERSONALITIES_ON_LOAD/RESET_BACKSTORIES_ON_LOAD from "false" to "true". After loading your save, save again. Then exit and change it back to "false". If you have non-unique companions you can reload multiple times until you get a backstory+personality combination you're happy with. You can see their personalities and backstory printed in the console after a reply, or just run the TALKER proxy with detailed logging.


## NOTES ON LLMs
* **"Fast" model for non-dialogue is VERY important:** This model is responsible for memory management, and thus is directly responsible for how well each character's long-term memory functions. The model needs to understand memory management prompts well in order to correctly summarize essential information while discarding irrelevant events and memories. I have had the best results so far using **iflow/deepseek-v3.2** for non-dialoge, with **nvidia_nim/qwen/qwen3-next-80b-a3b-instruct** being second-best of the ones I've tested. The memory management prompts probably need even more work and refinement.
* **Tested models for dialogue:**
   - **gemini/gemini-2.5-flash**: Great model, fast and good at following the prompt. Gives good replies. WARNING: after Google reduced the rate limits severely you will need MANY accounts to be able to use this model for gameplay. You probably need at LEAST 20 different API keys.
   - **iflow/deepseek-v3.2**: Good model, gives solid responses, fast enough. WARNING: iflow does not support concurrent calls as far as I know. If you want to use this for BOTH dialogue and non-dialogue, you will need multiple accounts. I have 4 accounts, which seems to suffice most of the time, but I still get an occasional error due to too many concurrent requests.
   - **nvidia_nim/moonshotai/kimi-k2-instruct-0905**: Produces great dialogue, but is poor at following instructions closely. Consistently produces replies that are longer and wordier than other models. Sometimes throws in action descriptions like ```*takes a swig of vodka*``` despite being told not to. Does not understand very specific instructions (notable example: it will use "Aloha!" in almost every line of dialogue for Hawaiian despite being told to only use it for greetings). You may still want to use it because it delivers great prose, but you have been warned.
   - **nvidia_nim/mistralai/mistral-large-3-675b-instruct-2512**: Great model for dialogue, but often overloaded/unavailable/too slow. You can try it out and see what your response times are, I used it for a while just fine but lately it seems like the response times are getting worse.
